---
layout: post
title: "HFOSS: Quiz"
description: "Post for the answers to the first HFOSS quiz."
tags:
 - hfoss
---

1. The following acronyms expand as follows:

        1.1) IRC - Internet Relay Chat
        1.2) FOSS - Free and Open Source Software
        1.3) OLPC - One Laptop Per Child
        1.4) DVCS - Distributed Version Control System
        1.5) FSF - Free Software Foundation
        1.6) PR - Pull Request

2. The name of the OLPC is the XO.

3. Sugar

4. The fourth grade.

5. Three instructional theories:

        5.1) didactic - a method of teaching whereby the instructor is the authoritarian figure. Students are passive while the instructor is the definitive source of knowledge.
        5.2) dialectic - a method of learning that involves two opposing view points, where the instructor guides the discussion and students are encouraged to defend their viewpoint.
        5.3) constructivist - a method of teaching that is based on new ideas and the interactions between participants as a way to learn. The role of the instructor is as the facilitator that helps the student learn the concepts.

6. The Creative Commons licenses are as follows:

        6.1) NC - C (You may not use the work for commercial purposes.)
        6.2) SA - A (You must convey the same rights "downstream" that were conveyed to you by "upstream".)
        6.3) ND - D (You may not make changes to the work.)
        6.4) BY - B (You must attribute the contributions of the original or upstream creators of the work.)

7. NC (non-commercial), ND (non-derivative)

8. SA (share-alike)

9. Two projects that distribute a body of non-software, free culture data.

        9.1) Wikipedia - a Free encyclopedia
        9.2) OpenStreetMap - a Free mapping solution complete with data

10. The four R's of software freedoms (or their descriptions):

        10.1) Redistribute (freely distributable, both in binary and source form)
        10.2) Reuse (no restrictions on how the software may be used)
        10.3) Remix (ability to modify and redistribute such modifications)
        10.4) Revise

Bonus:

* You cannot sell GPL'd software: False
* You can fork a GPL licensed Project and release it under an MIT license: False
* You can fork an MIT licensed Project and release it under a GPL license: True
* When does a work become "copyrighted" by an Author? As soon as it is created.
